By definition, availability is the time a system remains operational to perform
its required function in a specific period. It is a simple measure of the
percentage of time that a system, service, or a machine remains operational
under normal conditions. An aircraft that can be flown for many hours a month
without much downtime can be said to have a high availability. Availability
takes into account maintainability, repair time, spares availability, and other
logistics considerations. If an aircraft is down for maintenance, it is
considered not available during that time.

Reliability is availability over time considering the full range of possible
real-world conditions that can occur. An aircraft that can make it through any
possible weather safely is more reliable than one that has vulnerabilities to
possible conditions.

Reliability Vs. Availability If a system is reliable, it is available. However,
if it is available, it is not necessarily reliable. In other words, high
reliability contributes to high availability, but it is possible to achieve a
high availability even with an unreliable product by minimizing repair time and
ensuring that spares are always available when they are needed. Let’s take the
example of an online retail store that has 99.99% availability for the first
two years after its launch. However, the system was launched without any
information security testing. The customers are happy with the system, but they
don’t realize that it isn’t very reliable as it is vulnerable to likely risks.
In the third year, the system experiences a series of information security
incidents that suddenly result in extremely low availability for extended
periods of time. This results in reputational and financial damage to the
customers.
